This is a science podcast for June 21st,
2024.
I'm Megan Cantwell, filling in for Sarah Crespi.
First up this week, staff writer Dan Cleary
joins me to talk about the hunt for
habitable exoplanets.
What started as a search focused on Earth
-like rocky planets is expanding to planets with
thicker atmospheres, or even planets wrapped entirely in
water.
Next, producer Arianna Remmel talks to researcher Ava
Fannershtil about an unexpected source of volatile organic
compounds causing air quality to worsen on hot
days in Los Angeles.
If you were to be on one of
the planets in the TRAPPIST-1 system, what
would that be like?
What would that feel like?
Living on one of these planets around TRAPPIST
-1 would be very bizarre to us.
You'd be living in this sort of strip
around the order of nighttime and daytime in
perpetual sunset.
The other thing that would be very peculiar
would be the other planets because they're all
very bunched close together.
When one came close, it would be larger
than the moon.
If more than one of those planets were
inhabited, you would be able to see the
lights of towns and buildings and so on
on a neighboring planet as it drifted by.
It would be a strange, very science fiction
-like existence living on one of these planets.
There's no doubt that living on a planet
in the TRAPPIST-1 system 41 light-years
away from Earth would be nothing like existence
as we know it.
But that doesn't rule out the possibility that
there could be some sort of life present.
This Week in Science staff reporter Dan Cleary
wrote about the hunt for other Earth-like
planets and the hurdles that researchers have faced
so far in this pursuit.
Thank you so much for joining me on
the podcast, Dan.
My pleasure.
This is definitely not the first sort of
story where you've covered potentially life on other
planets, whether other planets are habitable.
But now, within the past few years, JWST
finally launched, giving us new insight into these
planets.
What can we probe into these planets that
we couldn't before?
What JWST gives them, first of all, is
it's a space telescope.
So it's looking at objects a long way
away, but without the interference from the atmosphere
in between.
JWST is not only a lot bigger than
Hubble, but it covers a very different wavelength
range.
So it's mostly in the infrared.
It can look at cooler objects.
It can hopefully detect molecules that are useful
to life in the atmospheres of these sort
of planets that we've been talking about.
They already are discovering amazing things, but mostly,
thus far, about much bigger and hotter planets.
To look at the smaller, cooler ones that
could possibly host life, it takes more time.
Researchers have had such a long time to
dream up their kind of ideal list of
exoplanets to look at that may be habitable.
What are the main ones that researchers are
hoping to look at with JWST?
Well, apart from TRAPPIST-1, which is the
sort of ideal because it's so close, it's
only 41 light-years away, it has these
seven Earth-sized planets.
And as such, it makes a sort of
ideal laboratory for astronomers to look at habitability
because they've got a whole collection of planets
of different temperatures because they're all different distances
from the star.
So they can see how temperature and their
different orbits affect their possible habitability.
You could look at different sorts of planets
other than small and rocky.
The slightly larger planets, you could have water
worlds.
There's one particular one that is again quite
close to Earth, which is called LHS 1140
b.
It's about 1.7 times larger than Earth.
There's an even larger planet, which is called
K2-18 b, which is more like Neptune
than it is like Earth.
It's got a thick atmosphere, which is going
to be principally hydrogen.
Planets are formed with hydrogen, but if they're
small, hydrogen just boils away because it's very
volatile.
But a bigger planet can hold onto the
hydrogen.
Observing a large planet like that with a
thick atmosphere is easier for JWST to do
because the signal of the light coming through
the atmosphere is going to be stronger.
So some people say we should be looking
at large planets like that because your chances
of getting a positive signal are greater.
The planets that are in the TRAPPIST-1
system, they're similar to us in size, right?
What are kind of the factors that are
making not only an exoplanet interesting to observe,
but what makes them good specifically for JWST
to get interesting results from?
Despite, you know, the great power of JWST,
if they look at a system like TRAPPIST
-1, they can't actually see the planets themselves.
The glare of a star is still too
great, and the distance between the planet and
the star is too small for even a
big telescope like JWST to separate them.
So what you have to do is look
at how the light from the whole system
changes, and that works particularly well if you're
looking at the system edge-on.
So you're seeing the planets move around the
star, and they pass in front of the
star, so they're blocking a little bit of
its light, and some of that starlight is
coming through their atmosphere.
And also when they move behind the star,
suddenly the light from the planet is disappearing.
And so by comparing the light from the
whole system with the light when the planet
is suddenly gone, you can subtract one from
the other and get the signal that is
just coming from the planet.
So those are the two techniques that astronomers
are using.
A transit, when it goes across the front,
and the other technique is watching it disappear
behind the star and seeing what disappears.
Edge-on planetary systems are key to studying
exoplanets, but also closeness to Earth.
If you go very much further away, it
gets much, much more difficult, and you have
to use a lot of telescope time to
get the same information.
Telescope time is very precious.
It seems like, okay, there's seven planets, maybe
they would have been able to take a
look at everything by now, but that's definitely
not the case.
They have not looked at every single planet
in the TRAPPIST-1 system.
So the two that they've looked at so
far, have the results been promising there, or
were they expecting to see an atmosphere or
potentially anything habitable?
Yeah, well, they looked at the two nearest
to the star, which are called B and
C.
They didn't find any evidence of an atmosphere,
or at least not a thick atmosphere.
It's possible that TRAPPIST-1C might have something
very much thinner than is on Earth, and
we can't detect it yet, but those results
were a bit disappointing.
They have looked at most of the others
very briefly, and again, they couldn't detect an
atmosphere, but what they did discover is that
the star is making their job much harder.
Ideally, you would have a star that was
just given a steady backlight for your observations,
but actually the star has a lot of
sunspots and flares, and that complicates the data
you're trying to get about the planet, because
you've got to disentangle this sort of variability
of the star from the variability of the
planet, and that's forcing astronomers to come up
with new techniques to try and separate those
two signals.
So do they think it's going to be
possible to separate it, or could it potentially
not be possible, in which case we aren't
going to get any sort of clear answer
on anything in the TRAPPIST-1 system?
Well, you know, they're clever people.
They're coming up with new things.
In the third year of observing, which is
just about to start, they're testing in one
of these techniques where they're looking at two
of the planets around TRAPPIST-1, planet B
and planet E.
Since they now know that B has no
atmosphere, they're looking at these two planets, which
transit the front of the star in quick
succession.
So they know B is going to produce
a spectrum with no atmosphere, and then they
can compare that to when E transits across,
which when the star won't have changed very
much, and E, they hope, has an atmosphere.
So any differences between those two spectra, hopefully,
will be signs coming from the atmosphere of
TRAPPIST-1E.
That's the plan.
But it's going to take a lot of
transits over the next two years to get
enough information to see that signal.
And how many times is it transiting in
a view that we can see per year?
It's a lot more than our Earth, right?
All of those planets, the longest orbit is
less than three weeks.
So they're all making quite quick orbits around
the star.
But just because of the orientation of the
telescope and so on, you can't, you know,
look at them all the time.
This little experiment of comparing planet E and
planet B, they're going to do it 15
times over the next two years.
And hopefully that'll give them enough signal.
They'll be able to discern something of an
atmosphere above the noise of the star.
This is going to be done over the
course of two years.
When it comes to looking at those planets
in the TRAPPIST-1 system that are a
little further from the M dwarf, how much
longer is it going to take to observe
that?
To one, get an answer of does it
have an atmosphere?
But then additionally to that, what's actually in
the atmosphere?
So looking at lots of transits, I've seen
estimates of over 100 hours of observing.
So many, many, many transits to get a
detection of carbon dioxide.
So that's a molecule they think probably exists
around these sorts of planets.
And it has a very strong signal that
JWST in particular can pick up.
Could you put into context 100 hours in
a year?
How much time is that from all of
the time that JWST has to observe?
In a whole year, it has 10,000
hours.
A lot of that goes to completely unrelated
sorts of science.
Of those 10,000 hours, about 30%
is typically spent on exoplanets.
And that's all different sorts of exoplanets.
So the amount of time spent actually looking
at TRAPPIST-1 is maybe a couple or
3% of the total time.
But still, that is dozens or hundreds of
hours.
It's a small chunk of what JWST does,
but everyone wants to use JWST.  So there's
a lot of competition.
Of the people you talk to, what are
kind of the main ideas that people think
we should be investing in right now to
find these habitable zones?
A lot of people think TRAPPIST-1 is
what we should be focusing on because it's
so close.
It has so many planets.
The Space Telescope Science Institute, which operates JWST,
they're donating 500 hours over the next year
to sort of widen this search.
And so astronomers have suggested what they should
do is just look at 15 to 20
other systems where there's a known Earth-sized
planet and just see whether there's an atmosphere
around it.
These other planets, are they also similarly orbiting
around these more turbulent M-dwarfs, or are
they like in very sort of different systems?
Typically, they would be around M-dwarfs because
you have this issue of not having a
star that's too bright, which would just, you
know, overwhelm the signal from the planet.
When this type of star, M-dwarfs, are
young, they're particularly turbulent and they blast out
a lot of X-rays and extreme ultraviolet
light.
It could just boil the atmospheres away.
And so these Earth-like planets very close
to that star could have nothing.
They could just be bare rocks.
We don't know.
And that's why the search is so intense
at the moment, just to find out whether
some of these atmospheres survive.
If it turns out that it's unlikely that
there will be an atmosphere around an M
-dwarf, then what other types of planets could
potentially be habitable?
People have done a lot of atmospheric modeling,
so taking what they think the ingredients of
a planet will be and playing around with
the parameters to see what atmosphere it might
have, whether it would have oceans.
There have been a lot of suggestions that
you might have water worlds, an ocean that
just covers the entire planet.
And that, you know, could be a habitable
exoplanet.
It might not have anything that looks like
us on it, but it could have microorganisms
that thrive in the global ocean.
When we're thinking about biosignatures that would be
present in an atmosphere that has life, we're
obviously thinking about our own planet.
But I guess if it were a water
world, could it potentially have different biosignatures or
what could we expect to look for that
would indicate there's life there?
The whole subject of biosignatures is very tricky
because we only have one planet with life
on it.
We have life growing in hot springs or
hydrothermal vents deeper under the ocean where there's
no light, but they're getting heat from hot
brine coming up from beneath the seabed.
So we know that life can live in
all sorts of bizarre situations, but viewing an
exoplanet from tens or hundreds of light years
away, trying to discern that is very, very
difficult.
What you're looking for is an atmosphere that's
in disequilibrium.
So it's in a state that you can't
explain how it could maintain itself in that
state unless there was a biological mechanism going
on in that planet.
What JWST can do is find the planets
that have the right physical conditions, the right
temperature, liquid water, enough light getting to the
surface, all of those things that life might
need.
That's the sort of thing you can discern
with JWST, but actually spotting whether life is
there may have to wait for the next
telescope.
Are there plans for any other telescopes that
could potentially gather this information?
Yeah, there are.
NASA, you know, it's very, very early stages,
but they are looking at a larger telescope,
which is going to be called the Habitable
Worlds Observatory.
That sounds very targeted to look for this
stuff, Ben.
Exactly, exactly.
Which would be similar to JWST in that
it has a folding mirror, but it would
be larger and it would probably look at
different wavelengths, might be optical light rather than
infrared.
But other people are also looking at the
possibility of having a sort of a flotilla
of separate telescopes.
If you have several telescopes flying in formations
hundreds or thousands of kilometers apart and you
combine their light through a process called interferometry,
you get a very, very detailed image, you
know, as if you had a telescope that
was as wide as those telescopes are separated.
So, say they were 100 kilometers apart, it
would be like you had a 100-kilometer
telescope.
Wow, that's cool.
Yeah, so it doesn't gather as much light
as 100 kilometers, but it has the resolution,
the fineness of detail.
And with something like that, you might be
able to zoom in on an exoplanet and
see whether it has areas of ocean and
areas of continent or cloud cover or ice
caps, things that we would recognize in an
image of a planet in our solar system.
That requires very sophisticated technology we don't yet
have, but people are working on it.
Working on the designs of how you would
achieve that sort of telescope.
Part of the job of JWST is to
beat a path for the next telescope to
have an even closer look.
Thank you so much, Dan.
My pleasure.
Dan Cleary is a staff reporter at Science.
You can find a link to the story
we talked about and see what your view
might look like from a TRAPPIST-1 planet
at science.org podcast.
Stay tuned for a chat with producer Ariana
Remmel and Ava Fannerstill about why a warming
world could worsen air pollution.
Photochemical smog is a notoriously noxious form of
air pollution that blankets the landscape in a
complex concoction of ozone and aerosols.
And it's a health risk that's all too
familiar to denizens of megacities like Los Angeles,
California, where gas-powered motor vehicles generate some
of the toxic chemicals that react to form
smog, such as volatile organic compounds called VOCs.
After decades of air quality regulations, VOC emissions
from cars and other anthropogenic sources have declined.
Yet Angelenos are still plagued by the hazardous
haze, especially during the hot summer months.
This week in science, Ava Fannerstill and colleagues
wrote about an overlooked source of volatile organic
compounds and why that matters for urban planning
in a warming world.
Welcome to the science podcast, Ava.
Hi, thanks for having me.
So urban air pollution is a hot topic
in atmospheric chemistry, especially in California.
I understand that you did this research while
you were a postdoc at UC Berkeley.
Did you ever experience air pollution from photochemical
smog or other sources while you lived in
the Bay Area?
Yeah, in the summer months when I was
living in Berkeley, there often were spare the
air alerts that told us to stay inside
and don't drive and things like that because
there was dangerous photochemical smog.
So yeah, it happened.
Although air pollution is much more of a
problem in Los Angeles than in the Bay
Area.
Certainly, there are many things that we know
about what causes smog.
What was the data gap that you were
trying to address in this particular study?
We were trying to find out, on the
one hand, why air pollution in Los Angeles
is temperature dependent.
I mean, of course, the chemistry goes faster
when temperatures are hotter.
So that's one part of the explanation that
is already known.
But that's the other part of, might also
the emissions change when it gets hotter and
the composition of emissions change.
And the other question was, why has air
pollution stagnated for at least the last decade
or so and not gotten better?
Although our cars are getting cleaner with all
the regulations that are in place.
There is a lot of chemistry that goes
on in the atmosphere.
You pointed specifically to volatile organic compounds.
Can you tell me a little bit more
about what those compounds are and the other
chemical players that are contributing to this type
of air pollution?
Yeah.
So you all know volatile organic compounds because
many of them are fragrant.
So you can smell them.
For example, the smell of a pine forest
or the smell of your perfume or also
bad smells.
All those are usually volatile organic compounds.
And they are present in the atmosphere in
very, very low levels and parts per billion
levels and below.
Despite that, they are really important for our
atmospheric chemistry because they are so reactive, they
can contribute to the formation of air pollutants.
Some examples would be terpenes that come out
of plants and that create, for example, this
nice pine smell or lemon smell is also
a terpene.
And then you also have typical traffic emissions
like benzene that is also by itself already
a cancerous VOC.
So how exactly are these VOCs reacting to
form ozone and aerosols?
Yeah.
So for that, you need sunlight.
And with the sunlight in the atmosphere, you
create radicals that then react very rapidly with
the reactive VOCs.
This reaction forms over a reaction chain on
the one hand particles because to oxidize them,
they get heavier and at some point they
can stick together.
And become really aerosol particles.
And when you inhale them, that creates a
health problem.
On the other hand, if you also have
nitrogen oxides from cars present in the atmosphere,
then this reaction also forms ozone.
So the bad ozone that's close to us
at the surface, not the good ozone that
protects us from UV light in the stratosphere.
And the bad ozone, if we inhale it
also is really bad for our lungs.
It also damages plant tissue.
So it reduces harvests and so on.
For that form, you need the combustion of
fossil fuel emissions that form nitrogen oxides.
And these then together with the VOCs form
the ozone.
So we know that VOCs contribute to air
pollution.
And we know that emissions from traffic have
declined over the last few decades.
So what are we missing here?
Yeah, that was exactly the question that we
posed in our study.
And that is why we equipped a small
aircraft with really high-tech instrumentation that can
measure hundreds of VOCs at the same time.
And not just measure the VOC concentrations, but
also directly measure emissions by a complex method
that we call airborne eddy covariance.
For that, we also need really high-speed
wind measurements.
And by combining these concentration measurements with the
wind measurements, we can then calculate emission fluxes.
So we can directly quantify how much is
emitted per area and time in a certain
location that we're flying over.
And doing that for hundreds of VOCs at
the same time then, of course, helps us
to find out what is emitted where and
which might be VOC species that have been
overlooked in the past or underestimated in the
emission models.
Tell me a little bit more about this
aircraft and, like, what taking these measurements actually
looked like.
Yeah, so this aircraft, it's a twin otter
propeller aircraft, really small.
You can't really stand up in there.
There were two pilots, two scientists, and then
space for three or four scientific instruments.
And we were flying at a thousand feet
altitude over Los Angeles.
So it's really low, not a usual aircraft
altitude that you are allowed to fly at.
And we got actually a lot of trouble
because in Los Angeles, there were lots of
airports and you fly from one tower airspace
into the next one every five minutes.
So our pilots had to do a lot
of talking with all these towers to explain
them what we're doing and that we do
not want to be diverted from our route
because it's also important to fly at the
same altitude, straight lines to do these measurements.
Since it was summer in Los Angeles and
we were flying really close to the surface,
it also got quite hot in the aircraft.
It didn't have any air conditioning.
We had to cool one of our instruments.
So my colleague had to lie down on
the aircraft floor and put ice packs on
the instrument to keep it from shutting down.
So, yeah, we were lucky it didn't happen
because then we would have lost a lot
of data.
Oh, my goodness.
That is certainly a demonstration of your dedication
to this project.
So with all of the effort that went
into taking these measurements, what did you actually
find?
We did these kinds of flights at different
temperatures.
So we flew patterns over Los Angeles or
let's say the greater Los Angeles basin.
That way we were able to map emissions
and compare them with emission models, but also
to see how these emissions depend on temperature.
And what we found was that temperature-dependent
emissions comprise the major part of the air
pollutant formation from these emissions.
So the temperature-dependent part of the emissions
is the biggest chunk of what contributes to
ozone formation and particle formation.
And that was kind of surprising because the
typical traffic emissions are not temperature dependent.
So it's really other sources that are doing
this.
And we found that a big part of
that is terpenes coming from plants mostly.
I mean, there's also terpenes and lots of
fragrance products that contribute, but a big part
of it must be plants because it's so
strongly temperature dependent.
And another result was also that some human
-made emissions, so anthropogenic emissions, are also temperature
dependent.
For example, solvents, which makes sense physically, they
evaporate more when it gets hotter.
But this was not yet considered in emission
models.
So I understand that heat helps to speed
up chemical reactions.
That makes sense that VOCs that are already
present are going to be on the fast
track to making some of these pollutants.
Why are the plants making more terpenes in
the heat?
Help me understand that element of this.
Yeah.
So it's actually a well-known fact that
plant emissions depend on temperature.
So the hotter it gets, the more they
emit.
Why they actually do that is not entirely
known.
There are different theories.
So they might be protecting their tissues from
reactive oxygen species.
They might also be protecting themselves against oxidants
like ozone, because then the ozone reacts away
with the terpenes that they emit.
And they, of course, also sometimes use terpenes
to communicate with each other.
And under stress, these emissions can even increase
more.
So then it can be orders of magnitude
higher than what you would expect from the
normal temperature dependence.
And I guess if terpenes are also some
of the molecules that are associated with fragrances,
it kind of makes sense that summer and
spring, when plants are flowering, there might also
be more terpenes.
Is that right?
Yeah, that's correct.
I mean, we cannot really distinguish where our
terpenes came from, but certainly when we were
flying, we saw that huge areas in Los
Angeles had these flowering jacaranda trees.
So many streets were purple, which looked really
beautiful from the plane perspective.
And the flowering can cause orders of magnitude
higher emissions compared to normal situations as well.
So that could certainly have been a contributor.
OK, so what I'm hearing here is that
the terpenes emitted by plants might actually be
an overlooked source of follicle organic compounds that
are contributing to air pollution.
But I don't think the solution is to,
like, cut down all the trees, right?
I mean, there are some really clear benefits
to having green spaces in cities.
But climate change projections are telling us that
summers are going to get hotter, that extreme
weather events like heat waves are going to
become more frequent.
So did your research point to other strategies
that we might be able to try to
compensate for the fact that these plants naturally
emit more terpenes in the heat?
Yeah, absolutely.
So, yeah, of course, it's not a solution
to get rid of the trees in our
cities because they provide shade, they improve local
climate.
They are really important.
Now, what is important to consider is that
what you need for ozone formation from these
VOCs that are emitted by the plants is
also nitrogen oxides that are emitted by the
burning of fossil fuels.
So if you get rid of the fossil
fuel use, then you also get rid of
the ozone.
So reducing our use of fossil fuels for
powering our cars and our electricity has many
benefits.
So it will not only reduce the temperature
increase that increases then the terpene emissions, but
it will also locally reduce the air production
because you need to get rid of the
nitrogen oxides and then your plant emissions are
no longer a problem for ozone.
Another point is also since we cannot really
regulate the emissions from trees, what we can
regulate is the anthropogenic part of the emissions.
So as we saw in our study, some
anthropogenic parts of the emissions are also temperature
dependent like solvents and this whole part of
solvents and household chemicals has not been very
much regulated in the past.
So I think there's also quite a lot
to gain in looking at how these chemicals
impact air pollution.
And last but not least, of course, when
you do urban greening in your city and
plant trees, you can, apart from other factors,
of course, like how is your tree adapted
to the local climate and how much shade
does it need to create?
One factor should also be how much VOCs
does it emit?
There are some species that emit more VOCs
than others.
So that can certainly be a factor to
consider to enhance air quality in our cities.
This is such fascinating research.
Thank you so much for joining us on
the podcast today to share your results.
Yeah.
Thank you so much for having me.
It was a pleasure to speak with you.
Eva Pfannestiller is an atmospheric chemist at the
Research Center Jlich.
Be sure to read the paper from Pfannestiller
and colleagues in science this week.
It's available now, and you can find a
link at science.org slash podcast.
And that concludes this edition of the Science
Podcast.
If you have any comments or suggestions, write
to us at sciencepodcast at aaas.org.
To find us on a podcast app, search
for Science Magazine, or you can listen on
our website, science.org slash podcast.
This show was edited by me, Megan Cantwell,
Ariana Rammel, Sarah Crespi, and Kevin MacLean.
We also had production help from Megan Tuck
at Podigy.
Our music is by Jeffrey Cook and Wen
Kui Wen.